What is SHO?
SHO stands for steering/hand offset. It's the horizontal line that runs from the steering axis to the midpoint of the grips.

Your favorite SHO (if you have one) is determined by your riding style, personal preference or (most likely) what you’re accustomed to riding. If you have a favorite handlebar/stem combo, you might like the SHO they create.

What does SHO mean?
We humans can ride a wide range of setups, from 150mm XC stems (like I rode back in the day) to direct-mount downhill downhill stems (which I also rode back in the day). We are very adaptable.

That said, your bike’s SHO has definite effects on your riding. Here are some general notions:


1. Positive SHO
When your hands are in front of your steering axis, you have positive SHO. An XC race bike might have 50mm or more of SHO. A typical trail bike might have 20mm or more of SHO.

When you have positive SHO:
When you steer from one side to the other, your bars arc away from you, then they arc toward you. This is very pronounced on a road bike.
When you lean or push forward on the bar, the bike wants to go straight. This saves riders who tend to lean forward on downhills. Leaning forward is a bad habit.
Your bike handles great at low speed in technical terrain. It might feel a bit sketchy at high speed on rough terrain.


2. Negative SHO
When your hands are behind the steering axis, you have negative SHO. Some downhill bikes have SHOs of -20mm or less. Motocross motorcycles have even less SHO.

When you have negative SHO:
When you steer from one side to the other, your bars arc toward you, then they arc away from you.
When you lean or pull backward on the bar, your bike wants to go straight. This this might feel good when going fast in a straight line, but leaning backward is a bad habit.
Your bike feels very stable at high speed. It might feel ponderous at low speed.


3. Neutral SHO
When your hands are in line with the steering axis, you have neutral SHO. Well-dialed trail, enduro and downhill bikes might have +10 to -10 SHO. The best are very close to zero.

When you have neutral SHO:
When you steer from one side to the other, your bars follow a simple arc, like a steering wheel.
Your bike handles the same whether you’re pulling or pushing the bars. Your hands should have neutral weight (light hands, heavy feet!).
Your bike handles well at all speeds and all terrain. The closer you get to zero SHO — ideally within ±5mm — the better your bike feels.
The best-handling bikes often have neutral SHOs!